welcome to TTI welcome to a whole new
world of science minerals are inorganic
substances with a defined chemical
composition that can be found all over
the Earth's surface they're composed of
various solid and inorganic chemical
elements and they commonly have a
crystal structure these miracles of
nature are very important because of
their use in different areas of human
activity they're used for manufacturing
many products such as working equipment
electronics and building materials
however some minerals are very beautiful
and they could be too dangerous for
human beings in their environment when
they're extracted and processed this
video will show that top 10 most
dangerous minerals around the world
number 10 pyrite iron pyrite looks very
shiny and silvery brass metallic in
color and which is also known as fool's
gold due to its resemblance to gold
actually it's a semiconductor material
which is also used as the cathode and
sometimes is used to make marcasite
jewelry and it's not useless at all
people use it actually to make batteries
radio receivers and they even use it in
the paper industry back in the 16th and
17th century pyrite was actually used as
an igniter for firearms if you take
pyrite and hit it against a metal it'll
actually spark which is how pyrite even
got its name as pyre is the Greek word
for fire it's the worst polluting agent
which acidifies ground water and streams
due to the acid mine drainage from
mining waste in the presence of air
pirate oxidation releases highly toxic
metals into the atmosphere one of them
is arsenic heavy metal releasing
metalloids from this mineral are very
toxic to humans pyrite is no longer
commercially mined because sulfur can
easily be collected as a byproduct of
natural gas and oil processing which
puts an end to that nowadays pyrite is
extracted only for study purposes and
scientific investigations feldspar
feldspars are a group of three rock
forming techno silicate minerals they
are aluminum silicates of sodium calcium
and potassium metals and mostly it's
produced by Italy and Turkey also
feldspars have small amounts of
radioactive uranium that form radon gas
and may cause a lung cancer these
minerals are also a source of lead
emissions that may be dangerous for the
environment they are used to manufacture
ceramics dinnerware Building tiles
artificial teeth and abrasive dust other
varieties of these minerals are used as
gemstones number eight hydroxyapatite
this is a naturally occurring most
stable form of calcium phosphate the
element phosphorus for your gardens
fertilizers and even fluoride in your
tap water comes from hydroxyapatite the
appetite has variants the hydroxyapatite
is one of the main components of tooth
enamel and the fluoride apatite is added
to water to prevent tooth cavities
having healthy teeth and bones is
essential but hydroxyapatite exposure
during mining or its extraction process
is hazardous as it can accumulate in the
heart valves and arteries actually many
people die because of this
hydroxyapatite accumulation in the
hearts valves and arteries every year as
this condition may cause constriction in
the blood flow or a total blood flow
blockage
Galina Galina also known as lead glance
is a mineral composed of octahedral lead
sulfide it's relatively insoluble in
water in ancient Egypt Galena was used
as I make up but I advise you to always
wash your hands after handling Galena if
it's released into the environment it
produces severe environmental
consequences even ingesting small
amounts of lead can cause brain damage
or death or Onslow exposure it can stop
the development of the nervous system
and fetuses and children it can also
cause cardiovascular diseases in adults
this mineral is often found in crystal
forms that have led as main components
and some minerals can have a little
amount of silver to saroo site and angle
sites are two byproducts of Galena
weathering these elements are even more
dangerous than Galena the most important
Galena deposits are in the US UK Germany
and Australia silver extraction from
Galena is done in Colorado Idaho Utah
and Montana in the u.s. number six
fluorspar fluoride is a soluble mineral
which is a compound of fluorspar it may
cause a severe bone disease known as
skeleton fluorosis fluorspar is produced
in big amounts
that's why 10 million people in Ginsu
China have
affected in the mining of this mineral
in that region fluorspar is used as a
fluxing agent to cast iron and steel for
the production of glass enamel
microscope and telescopic lenses at
present China is the main floor spar
producer followed by Mexico Mongolia and
Russia number five
quartz inhalation of quartz
nanoparticles over a very long period of
time will cause some serious diseases
such as silicosis lung cancer kidney
diseases and weakens the immune system
of the body approximately 3.2 million
workers in the USA factories are exposed
to silica dust this is the second
richest mineral on the Earth's surface
quartz originates from different forms
and this includes silica sand crystals
stones and Tripoli quartz has a great
commercial application in the oil
industry and in manufacturing electronic
and optical products most of the
commercial quartz is produced from seed
crystal which is also known as chips on
the other hand natural quartz crystals
are used as gemstones u.s. and Brazil
are the primary producers of natural
crystal quartz whereas Canada Brazil
Germany Madagascar China South Africa
and Venezuela are the primary producers
of quartz chips cinnabar it's the most
beautiful and toxic mineral to handle on
earth at the same time it's the world's
main source of mercury and has been
mined as far back as the Neolithic Age
and has been extracted since the
Neolithic period this mineral is
insoluble in water and upon oxidation it
produces toxic compounds such as
methyl mercury and dimethyl mercury
cinnabar is lethal and small
concentrations and it can be absorbed
through the respiratory tract bowels or
from the skin the compounds originated
from cinnabar can affect the nervous
system severely and they can also cause
problems and the development of fetuses
and children it's bright red color made
people in the Middle East and
pre-columbian America think it had some
magical and medicinal properties number
Senna cite this mineral is the member of
the Mesa silicate family it is an
important source of beryllium which is a
toxic element that can induce lung
cancer and severe lung inflammatory
diseases such as Burley OSIS and
chemical pneumonitis Burley OSIS mostly
occurs due to over sensitivity of lungs
to beryllium and causes the development
of small inflammatory nodules called
granulomas however beryllium is used as
a component for the windows of x-ray
tubes as a neutron moderator in nuclear
reactors or as a structural material for
satellites high-speed planes spaceships
missiles and pieces of communication
devices in the past this mineral was
also used in the ceramics industry but
it was banned because after breathing
beryllium dust workers were at the
highest risk to develop the lung
diseases number two
area night area night is a natural
fibrous mineral of sodium potassium and
calcium it's found in the group of the
silicate minerals that are called
zeolites exposure to area night may
cause diseases such as mesothelioma
which is a where type of cancer and
originates from super malignant
mesothelioma cells the mesothelium is a
membrane that forms the lining of
several body cavities this mineral has
been found in volcanic ash that has been
altered by weathering effects and
groundwater area night mineral has
caused a considerable number of deaths
in Turkey it's mining has been banned
since the 1980s but exposure to this
dangerous mineral can happen during
zeolite production and exploitation
which is still a commercial business
nowadays number one Costa delight this
mineral also known as blue asbestos is
considered the most dangerous mineral in
the world exposure to this fibrous
mineral causes lethal diseases cross it
alight as any other type of asbestos it
is used to manufacture commercial and
industrial products this includes tiles
to cover the roofs floors and walls
Cement products and it was also used to
insulate steam engines in the past
christina light mining was carried out
in western australia bolivia and south
africa but now the production of this
mineral has been banned due to its
severe health risk for humans as dr.
Christopher Wagner discovered that
Crystal Light is associated with
mesothelioma in 18% of mining workers
thanks for watching
glad I don't have any of these in my
mineral collection which mineral do you
have let me know in the comments below
if you're new here then feel free to
subscribe I'll catch you guys in my next
video peace